1 
                                                             Lodger Agreement 
AGREEMENT FOR NON-EXCLUSIVE OR SHARED OCCUPATION   
This LODGER AGREEMENT is made up of the details about the parties and the agreement in  Part 1, 
the Terms and Conditions printed below in Part 2, and any Special Terms and Conditions  agreed 
between the parties which have been recorded in Part 3, whereby the Room is licensed by  the 
Householder and taken by the Lodger during the Term upon making the Accommodation  Payment.   
PART 1 - PARTICULARS   
PROPERTY: [INSERT PROPERTY ADDRESS]
ROOM: means the room or rooms in the Property which as the Householder from time to  time allocates 
to the Lodger   
SHARED AREAS: the rooms in the Property which the Householder has agreed may be used  by the 
Lodgers (along with any other people who live in the Property, including  the 
Householder) which are: the entrance hall, staircase and landings of the  Property, the 
kitchen for cooking eating and the storage of food, the lavatory and  bathroom, the 
sitting room, the garden (where applicable). Should the Lodger  not be allowed to use 
any of these areas or there are any additional  Shared Areas in the Property they can 
use, this should be reflected in  Part 3: Property Rules and Services and Any Additional 
Terms   
HOUSEHOLDER: (“landlord”)   
[INSERT HOUSEHOLDER NAME]
 
LODGER:  
[INSERT LODGER NAME]
 
START DAY:  February 2025 
 
TERM:  (6/12) Months Rolling Contract until Terminated by either party 
INITIAL PAYMENT: £1300, (current and month in advanced payment) 
ACCOMMODATION PAYMENT: £650 PM 
 
PAYMENT DAY: The .....th day of each month.
DEPOSIT:  £.................  If Appliable  (yes/no)

RENT REVIEW:
The Accommodation Payment may be reviewed annually on the anniversary of the Start Date.
The Householder may increase the rent by giving the Lodger at least one calendar month's
written notice prior to the proposed increase taking effect. Any increase shall not exceed
5% per annum or the rate of inflation (as measured by the Consumer Price Index), whichever
is lower. The Lodger may choose to accept the increase or terminate this Agreement by giving
notice as per clause 9.2. 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
EARLY TERMINATION:   
Either party may at any time end this Agreement earlier   
than the End Date by giving notice in writing of at least   
one calendar month ending on the Payment Day if within of the rental term any if any deposits was 
taken will be void unless mutually agreed by both parties  
UTILITY COSTS: all utilities including, gas, electric, water, basic internet. 
Excluded Utility Cost: Television License is not included, if the lodger would like to view any LIVE 
broadcast, the lodger accepts responsibility to pay for the television licence and provide evidence of the 
purchase at their own expense (bbc iplayer etc) 
Any Utilities not listed as payable by the Lodger in Part 3 of 
 this agreement are included in the Accommodation Payment.   
Note: The Householder may not require the Lodger to pay   
any charge which is not a permitted payment under the   
Tenant Fees Act 2019.   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
NOW IT IS AGREED as follows:   
1. About the Licence to Occupy a Room in the Property   
1.1. The Householder permits the Lodger to occupy the Room until either party ends the  
arrangement as provided for under clause 9 of this agreement.   
1.2.The Lodger will occupy the Room personally and shall not share the Room with any  other 
person, except where the Lodger has asked to share the Room with another person  and the 
Householder has agreed in writing (in Part 3: Property Rules and Services and  Any Additional 
Terms) that this person (the “Permitted Occupier”) may occupy the  Room with Lodger during 
the Term.   
1.3.The Lodger shall have use of the Contents in the Room, an inventory of which will be  prepared 
by the Householder and provided to the Lodger.   
1.4.The Lodger may use the facilities of the Shared Areas of the Property in common with  the 
Householder (and the other Lodgers of the Householder) but only in conjunction  with their 
occupation of the Room under this agreement.   
1.5.This agreement is not intended to confer exclusive possession upon the Lodger nor to  create 
the relationship of landlord and tenant between the parties. The Lodger shall not  be entitled to 
an assured tenancy or a statutory periodic tenancy under the Housing Act  1988 or any other 
statutory security of tenure now or when the licence ends.   
1.6.This agreement is personal to the Lodger, cannot be assigned to any other party, and can  be 
terminated by either party on notice or without notice in the case of serious breaches  of the 
agreement.   
1.7.It is a condition of this agreement that the Lodger maintain a “Right to Rent” as defined  by the 
Immigration Act 2014 at all times during the Term.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
2. Lodger Obligations   
The Lodger Agrees with the Householder:  
2.1. Payments   
2.1.1.To pay the Accommodation Payment at the times and in the manner set out above.   
2.1.2. To pay simple interest at the rate of 3% above the Bank of England base rate (as  in force from time 
to time) upon any payment or other money lawfully due from the  Lodger under this Agreement 
which is not paid to the Householder within 14 days  after the due date for payment, for the period 
starting on the due date until  payment (both before and after any judgment).   
2.2. Utilities   
2.2.1. Where the Householder has agreed to provide the Utilities and for the Lodger’s  contribution towards 
these costs to be made through the Accommodation Fee, to  make only reasonable use of the Utilities 
consistent with ordinary residential use by a  single occupier (or two occupiers where a Permitted 
Occupier also resides in the  Room).   
2.2.2. Where the Householder has not agreed to provide the Utilities at no additional cost  to the Lodger, to 
make a reasonable and proportionate contribution to the cost  according to use of all charges in 
respect of any of the Utilities or services used at or  supplied to the Property. The Householder shall 
supply copies of any relevant bills  and the basis of calculation to the Lodger upon request, and 
payment for Utilities  shall be made to the Householder on written demand.   
2.2.3. Where the Householder agrees to provide some but not all of the Utilities at no  additional cost to the 
Lodger (beyond the Accommodation Fee) clause 2.2.1 shall  apply to the Utilities which are provided 
at no additional cost, and clause 2.2.2 shall  apply to other Utilities.   
2.3. Use of the Property   
2.3.1. Not to use or occupy the Room in any way whatsoever other than as a private  residence;   
2.3.2. Not to let or purport to let or share any rooms at the Property or take in any  lodger or paying guest 
or, without the consent of the Householder (not to be  
unreasonably withheld) to permit any person to sleep or stay at the Property. With  the 
Householder’s prior permission in each case, the Lodger is allowed to have  occasional overnight 
visitors who may remain in the Room and may make use of  the same facilities in the Property as 
the Lodger enjoys. The permitted length of  stay of any overnight visitor is to be negotiated with the 
Householder;   
              2.4. Maintenance   
2.4.1. To keep the interior of the Room and all other Shared Parts (including the  lavatory and bathroom) in 
good and clean condition and to make good any damage  caused there.   
2.4.2. To keep the Contents in good condition and shall not remove any articles from the Room.   
2.4.3. To make good all damage to the Contents and replace with articles of a similar  kind and value any 
items broken or damaged by the Lodger as reasonably requested  by the Householder   
 
5 
2.5. Activities at the Property  
2.5.1. Not to smoke cigarettes, cigars, pipes or any other substances in the Property only outside  
.  2.5.2. To cook at the Property only in the kitchen;   
2.5.3. Not to keep any pet or any kind of animal at the Property without the  Householder’s prior consent;   
2.5.4. Not make any alteration or addition to the Room or without the Householder’s  prior written consent 
do any redecoration or painting of the Room;   
2.5.5. Not do or omit to do anything on or at the Property which may be or become a  nuisance or 
annoyance to the Householder or any other occupiers of the Property or  sharers or occupiers of 
adjoining or nearby premises or which may in any way  prejudice the insurance of the Property or 
increase the insurance premium payable  by the Householder;   
2.5.6. To ensure that the Room is cleaned weekly and that all rubbish is disposed of  daily, sorted in 
accordance with any locally applicable recycling policy, and placed  in the appropriate rubbish bins 
provided by the Householder.   
2.6. Other Obligations   
2.6.1. Promptly on request by the Householder, to comply with such checks and provide  such documents 
certifying the Right to Rent of the Lodger as are reasonably required  by the Householder, and to 
ensure that any Permitted Occupier complies with all  such checks.   
2.6.2. To assist the Householder to apply for any discounts or exemptions from Council  Tax by providing a 
copy of any Student Exemption Certificate or other evidence of  their status as a student (and that 
of any Permitted Occupier) which the Householder  reasonably requires for this purpose.   
2.7. At the end of the Agreement  
2.7.1. To vacate the Room and the Property at the end of Term and leave the Room in the  same clean 
and tidy state and condition it was in at the beginning of the Term (fair  wear and tear excepted), 
returning all keys and any access fobs to the Property;  
2.7.2. To provide the Householder with a forwarding address when the agreement comes to  an end and 
remove all rubbish and all personal items (including the Lodger’s own  furniture and equipment) from 
the Property before leaving; 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
6 
  3. Householder Obligations   
The Householder agrees with the Lodger:   
3.1.To keep in good repair the structure and exterior of the Property and the Room  (including drains gutters and 
external pipes) and to keep in repair and proper working  order the installations (if any) in the Property for the 
supply of water gas and electricity  and for sanitation (including basins sinks and sanitary conveniences but not the  
fixtures, fittings, and appliances for making use of water gas or electricity) and for space  heating and heating water 
provided that the Householder is not required:   
3.1.1.to carry out any works or repairs for which the Lodger is liable, or   
3.1.2. to rebuild or reinstate the Property in the case of destruction or damage by fire by  tempest flood or 
other inevitable accident, or   
3.1.3. to keep in repair or maintain anything which the Lodger is entitled to remove  from the Property.   
3.2. To keep in good repair and working order such fixtures and fittings as are provided by  the Householder for 
use by the Lodger provided always that the Householder is not  required:   
3.2.1. to repair any item broken by the negligence or misuse of the Lodger or any of his  guests or invitees, 
or   
3.2.2. to repair any item unless it has been reported to him in writing and then shall be  allowed a 
reasonable time to effect a repair or replacement, or  
3.2.3. to replace any item with an exact duplicate and is permitted to substitute any  item which reasonably 
accomplishes the same function.   
3.3. To comply with the Gas Safety (Installation and Use) Regulations 1998 (as amended) by  ensuring that all 
gas appliances in the Property are checked by a Gas Safe-registered  installer on an annual basis and 
that a record is kept stating the defects found (if any)  and the remedial action taken and that the Lodger 
receives a copy of the Gas Safety  Certificate with 28 days of the annual check (in addition to providing a 
copy before the  Lodger occupies the Property.   
3.4. To ensure that all furniture and furnishings provided for use by the Lodger complies  with the 
Furniture and Furnishings (Fire)(Safety) Regulations, 1988 (as amended).   
3.5.To ensure that all electrical equipment supplied to the Lodger is kept in good repair and  is not damaged 
or defective.   
3.6. To install and keep in good working order smoke detectors in the Property, and, if there  is a fixed 
combustion appliance in any part of the Property, to install and keep in good  working order a carbon 
monoxide detector.   
3.7.To ensure that all times the Room and the Shared Areas are fit for human habitation.  3.8. To pay the 
Council Tax for the Property during the Term.   
3.9. To warrant that they have permission to take in lodgers in the Property.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
4. Amicable Sharing   
4.1.The Lodger shall use his or her best efforts to share the use of the Room and Property  amicably and 
peaceably with the Householder (and the Property with such other  Lodgers as the Householder shall 
from time to time permit to use the Property). The  Lodger shall not interfere with or otherwise obstruct 
such shared occupation in any way.   
4.2. The Householder and the Lodger will respect each other's reasonable needs for privacy  and decency. 
Neither party will exercise their rights of access to any room in a way that  is likely to violate such 
reasonable needs. Nothing in this clause is intended to grant the  Lodger exclusive possession of the 
Room or any other part of the Property.   
                                                                       
5. Keys   
5.1.The Householder shall give the Lodger one set of keys to the Room (if applicable) and to  the Property.   
5.2.The Lodger will keep safe any keys or other security devices giving access to the Property  or to the Room, 
and will pay the Householder’s reasonable costs incurred in  consequence of the loss of any such key, or 
other such device.   
5.3.The Householder shall retain his or her own set of keys and the Householder and any  persons authorised 
by him or her may exercise their right to use these and obtain free  entry to the Room at any reasonable 
time.   
6. Deposit  if applicable  
6.1.The Deposit will be held by the Householder during the Term. No interest will be payable  by the 
Householder to the Lodger in respect of the deposit money.   
6.2. The Householder is not required to protect the Deposit with a Government approved  protection scheme.   
6.3. At the end of the Term (however it ends) on giving vacant possession of the Room to the  Householder the 
Deposit shall will be refunded to the Lodger but less any reasonable  
deductions properly made by the Householder to cover any reasonable costs incurred by  or losses 
caused to him by any breaches of the Lodger’s obligations under this  Agreement.   
6.4. The Deposit shall be repaid to the Lodger, at the forwarding address provided to the  Householder, as 
soon as reasonably practicable. The Householder shall not except  where they can demonstrate 
exceptional circumstances retain the Deposit for more than  one month (subject to the right to make 
deductions at clause 6.3.).   
                                                           7. Uninhabitability   
7.1.In the event of destruction to the Property or of damage to it which shall make the same  or a substantial 
portion of the same uninhabitable, the Lodger shall be relieved from  making the Payment by an amount 
proportionate to the extent to which the Lodger’s  ability to live in the Property is thereby prevented, save 
where the destruction or  damage has been caused by any act or default by the Lodger or where the 
Householder’s  insurance cover has been adversely affected by any act or omission on the part of the  
Lodger.   
 
 
 
8 
                                                             8. Moving to another room   
8.1.The Householder may give reasonable written notice directing the Lodger to use another  room of similar 
size and condition to the Room in the Property. If such notice is given  the Lodger must remove his or her 
personal belongings to the new room and must leave  the old room in a clean and tidy condition. The 
Lodger must then use only the new  room until such time as he or she is directed to move again.   
8.2. Notice to use another room in the Property must give the Lodger a minimum of 48  hours to move or an 
amount of time which is reasonable in the circumstances,  whichever is longer.   
 
9. Ending this Agreement   

9.1.Termination for breach of this Agreement: If at any time during the Term the  Lodger is in breach of any 
term of this agreement, or any sums due under this  agreement are more than 14 days late, or if the 
Lodger is declared bankrupt or enters  into any form of arrangement with his creditors, the Householder 
may terminate this  
agreement by giving 7 days’ notice to the Lodger in writing to remedy the breach. If after  7 days the 
breach has not been remedied the landlord may terminate this agreement by  giving a further 7 days’ 
notice in writing to the Lodger.   

9.2. Break Clause: Either party may at any time during the Term terminate this  Agreement by giving to the 
other prior written notice of not less than one calendar month  expiring the day before a Payment Day. 
Upon the expiry of that notice this Agreement  shall end with no further liability for either party except for 
any existing breaches.   

9.2. Behaviour Clause: If the householder deems that the behaviour of the tenant is unacceptable, the
householder will provide in writing a warning notice of this breach, if the tenant fails to correct this
behaviour the householder may terminate the contract with a maximum of 14 days notice, depending on
the severity of the behaviour, for example aggressive behavior, the contract may be terminated with
immediate effect.

9.3. Rent Review and Increase: The Accommodation Payment may be reviewed and increased
annually on the anniversary of the Start Date. The Householder shall give the Lodger not less
than one calendar month's written notice of any proposed increase. Any increase shall not
exceed 5% per annum or the rate of inflation (as measured by the Consumer Price Index at the
time of review), whichever is the lower. Upon receipt of notice of a rent increase, the Lodger
may either:
(a) accept the new Accommodation Payment, which shall take effect from the date specified
in the notice; or
(b) terminate this Agreement by giving notice in accordance with clause 9.2 (Break Clause),
such notice to be given within 14 days of receipt of the rent increase notice.
If the Lodger does not respond within 14 days of receiving the rent increase notice, they shall
be deemed to have accepted the new Accommodation Payment.

9.4. At the end of the agreement any items remaining in the Property or Room which are the  property of the
Lodger must be removed by the Lodger. If any items (apart from  perishable food) are left behind by the 
Lodger the Householder will make reasonable  efforts to notify the Lodger and will store them for a period 
of 14 days, after which time  the Householder will be permitted to dispose of the items as they see fit.  
 
10.About the Legal Effect of this agreement   
10.1. If any term of this agreement is, in whole or in part, held to be illegal or  unenforceable to any 
extent under any enactment or rule of law, that term or part shall  to that extent be deemed not 
to form part of this agreement and the enforceability of the  remainder of this agreement shall 
not be affected.   
10.2. The Householder and the Lodger agree that this agreement shall be exclusively  governed by 
and interpreted in accordance with the laws of England and Wales, and  agree to submit to the 
exclusive jurisdiction of the English Courts.   
10.3. This agreement including the attached Property Rules and Services in Part 3  embody the 
entire understanding of the parties relating to the Room and the Property  and to all matters 
dealt with by any of the provisions in this agreement.   
 
9 
                                               11. Definitions and Interpretation   
In this agreement:   
11.1. “the Room” means such room or rooms in the Property as the Householder shall from time to time 
allocate to the Lodger.   
11.2. “the Contents” means the furniture and Householder’s possessions used by the Lodger from time to time.   
11.3. “Deposit” means the sum set out above which the Lodger must in addition to the  first payment of 
Accommodation Payment pay to the Householder to be held as a security  against a breach of any of the 
Lodger’s obligations in this agreement.   
11.4. “Householder” includes the successors in title to the Householder’s interest in the  Property.   
11.5. “Lodger” means the person or persons identified above who the Householder  permits to occupy a Room 
in the Property under this agreement.  
11.6. “Property” means the Property as set out above along with its exterior and common  areas and includes 
all the Contents.   
11.7. “Shared Areas” means the rooms in the Property which the Householder has agreed  may be used by 
the Lodgers (along with any other people who live in the Property,  including the Householder) which are 
set out above in Part 1 of this agreement, subject to any modification recorded in Part 3.   
11.8. “Accommodation Payment” means the sum payable in advance from the start of this  agreement in equal 
instalments on the Payment Days whether demanded or not.   
11.9. “Payment Day” means the days as specified above on which the Accommodation Payment should be 
paid, the first such payment being due on the signing of this agreement.   
11.10. “Term” means a fixed term between the Start Date and the End Date as set out above.  11.11. “Utilities” 
means electricity, gas, water, foul water and surface drainage, heating,  ventilation and air conditioning, 
telephone, television, internet and other electronic  communications and all other utilities serving or 
consumed at the Property.   
12. In this agreement:   
12.1. the words 'include', 'includes' and 'including' are deemed to be followed by the words  'without 
limitation'.   
12.2. the word 'today' refers to the date of this agreement.   
12.3. The word 'liability' includes all costs, claims, expenses and loss incurred or suffered by  the 
relevant party.   
12.4. General words introduced by the word 'other' do not have a restrictive meaning even  when 
preceded by words indicating a particular class of acts, things or matters.   
12.5. An obligation not to do something includes an obligation not to cause or allow that  thing to be 
done.  
 
10 
12.6 An obligation on the Householder to do or not to do something in respect of the  Lodger shall 
include a similar obligation in respect of the Permitted Occupier (if any).   
12.7. obligations owed by or to more than one person are owed by or to them jointly and  severally. 
This means, for example, that any one or more of the individuals jointly forming  the 
Householder can at the Lodger’s sole discretion be held responsible for the obligations  under 
this agreement.   
12.8. any reference to the singular shall include the plural and to ‘he’, ‘him’ and ‘his’ shall  be taken 
to include ‘she’, ‘her' and ‘hers’.   
12.9. the boldface headings and italicised drafting notes contained within square brackets  are for 
ease of completion and reading only and are not to be used to construe the terms of  this 
agreement.   
13. In this agreement unless otherwise specified:   
13.1. a reference to legislation is a reference to all legislation having effect in the United  Kingdom 
at any time during the Term, including directives, decisions and regulations of the  Council or 
Commission of the European Union, Acts of Parliament, orders, regulations,  consents, 
licences, notices and bye laws made or granted under any Act of Parliament or  directive, 
decision or regulation of the Council or Commission of the European Union, or  made or 
granted by a local authority or by a court of competent jurisdiction and any  approved codes of 
practice issued by a statutory body, and   
13.2. a reference to a particular piece of legislation is a reference to that legislation as  amended, 
consolidated or re-enacted from time to time and all relevant subordinate  legislation made 
under it from time to time.  
 
 
*Part 3 - Property Rules and Services and Any Additional Terms   
Note to the Lodger:   
If you have any concerns about any terms which the Householder wishes to add to  this agreement 
you should seek advice from a qualified legal adviser, a law centre or  housing advice service, or a 
citizen’s advice bureau before signing the agreement. 
 
NOTES ON SIGNING THIS AGREEMENT   
 
The Lodger must be given a copy of this agreement prior to signing it so that they have an  
opportunity to read and understand it and take legal advice on it.   
The Lodger should inspect the Room, Property and contents and check that they are in good  
condition.   
The Householder must explain to the Lodger that the Room and all parts of the Property will  be 
shared with the Householder and other persons to whom the Householder grants a  licence and 
that the Lodger shall not have exclusive possession of the Room or any part of  the Property under 
any circumstances.   
   
Signed by the following parties:-   
 
*Signed by the Lodger: .................................................................   
*Date: .................................................................  
   
*Signed by the Householder: .................................................................   
*Date: .................................................................     
==================== ID DOCUMENTS====================
























